{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2761
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green255\blue10;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c99942\c98555\c0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww17780\viewh12800\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Reviewer #1: The manuscript treats the costs and constraints of immune activity during development in blue monkeys. It focuses on the potential energetic  trade-offs between growth and immunity during development. I found the manuscript interesting to read and believe that with some revision it is worthy of publication in Heliyon. I divide my recommendations for improving the manuscript into two components: theoretical and methodological.\
Theory \'ac The article uses the phrase, "Life history theory predicts\'85". I would recommend not using this phrase, since there is no unified life history theory, rather a collection of conceptual foundations, and the phrase is often used erroneously, especially with respect to psychology. \cb2 More importantly, the theory development could be significantly improved by a more robust treatment of the evolutionary economics of budget constraints and the elasticity of investments in growth and immune function with respect to changes in budget.\cb1  The most fundamental prediction regarding those investments in optimum (i.e., as the result of natural selection on optimum allocations) is that the marginal fitness returns from each investment be equal. The fitness returns from growth can operate through both survival and future fertility. Large body size may confer greater resistance to both predation and pathogens, which, in turn, may results in greater survival to both reproductive age and\
later in life. Increased growth can result in a longer reproductive span through an earlier at age first reproduction, and also result in a higher fertility rate once reproduction has begun. Investments in immune function are likely to act primarily through survival, but can also affect growth through reduced time spent sick and through additional negative caloric effects of morbidity. T\cb2 he reason why we might expect short term tradeoffs between immune investments and growth is that infections and other forms of morbidity requiring immune responses and repair tend to occur sporadically and over relatively short periods of time.\cb1 \
This logic is not fully fleshed out in the manuscript but is implicit in the arguments put forth in the manuscript. However, the manuscript fails to go a step further in understanding and predicting the positive relationship between growth and investments in immune function over the long run. \
\

\f1\b RANK IS IN MODELS, DOES NOT INFLUENCE - add this to system introduction and discussion
\f0\b0 \
Monkey species that have dominance hierarchies tend to evidence differential access to preferred foods. There is a large literature showing that growth rates, age of first reproduction, and fertility rate during adulthood differ based on dominance status. The effects of maternal dominance status tend to be greater on females in female philopatric species but can confer on both males and females during development. \cb2 Another prediction based on the evolutionary economic modelling is that individuals with greater access to energy should invest more in both growth and immunity\cb1 . 
\f1\b Monthly growth not a simple function of energy balance in our models\'85 tho 
\f0\b0 The prediction that fitness returns between investments in growth and immunity are equalized at an evolutionary\
optimum also implies that as energy availability increases, investments in both growth and immunity will increase as well. In my view, this is a better theoretical foundation for the paper.\
These theoretical comments have direct implications for the methods, particularly data analysis. The analysis that I would suggest running is a mixed fixed and random effects regression model with creatinine (not change in creatinine) as the dependent variable with age, sex, age by sex, maternal dominance, sex by maternal dominance, and neopterin as independent variables with monkey ID as a random factor variable. This would allow the researchers to use all measurements on each individual in the model. It will also provide estimates of the effects of age on mass, which should be positive in the animals are growing, the effects of sex on mass (males should be larger), the impacts of maternal dominance on achieved mass, and the relationship of immune investments and body mass.\

\f1\b This is what our model does when the response is estimate lean body mass\'85 we simply leave out the interaction by rank, reasoning is flawed bc reviewer expects that energy will be higher and thus growth faster for high ranking animals, i.e. that rank will have an independent effect on mass, not that the relationship of energy and mass vary by rank\'85
\f0\b0 \
\
 It will also allow for an estimation of individual differences in body mass, which is not addressed in the ms. It would be nice to have corresponding figures for the reader to be able to visualize\
growth. \

\f1\b Add figure to visualize ELBM by age in methods.
\f0\b0 \
\
That analysis would complement the analyses of short-term growth and neopterin. Building on the theoretical foundation above, I think it would also help in explaining the apparently contradictory results in Figures 1 and 3.\

\f1\b What are contradictory results?
\f0\b0 \
\
Overall, this is an interesting paper and with revision deserves publication. I think it will be of great interest to your readership.\
\
\
Additional points:\
The introduction and discussion could also be improved by emphasizing the limited scope of immune function investigated.\

\f1\b Emphasize limited scope of immune function in discussion
\f0\b0 \
\
 This study focuses on one measure specific to cellular immunity, but the ms often conflates it with costs of immunity in general. This is most apparent in a human study cited (Urlacher et al.), which looked at immune function and growth in the Shuar (line 354). There is a claim in the discussion that the results of this study are consistent with the Urlacher paper. However, that paper only found a short-term inverse association for a measure of innate immunity (CRP). \

\f1\b Emphasize differences with Urlacher paper, a \'93however\'94 about how short term costs were associated with inflammatory innate immunity, however investment in humoral immunity resulted in less growth over a longer period.
\f0\b0 \
\
They did not find an association with their measure of cell-mediated immunity (EBV-ab), and there was an inverse association between humoral immunity (IgE) and longer-term growth. Another human study focusing on the Tsimane (Garcia et al. 2020, EMPH) found an inverse association between adaptive immunity and child height-for-age z-score, reflecting longer term growth. They measured both\
cell-mediated and humoral immunity, reflected in T and B cell counts respectively. These studies highlight that different results are obtained from different measures capturing varying time scales, as well as across different branches of immune function. The ms could be improved by emphasizing this complexity for the reader.\
Also, both the Urlacher and Garcia papers tested an interaction with proxies for energy budgets, hypothesizing a stronger trade-off in individuals with lower budgets. I didn\'92t see mention of this in the ms, and I think it would be strengthened with that additional analysis.\
}